Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. Clifford Simak is a veteran science fiction
writer who has been producing short stories and novels continuously since 1938.
Simak won the International Fantasy Award for his City Series, Hugo Awards for
his stories at the Big Front Yard, in the Grotto of the Dancing Deer, and in the
novel Way Station. And he was honored by his peers when they presented him with
the Grandmaster Nebula Award. Simak's prolific output is remarkable when one
learns that until his retirement a few years ago, he was a full-time newspaper
man. We asked him how he decided to become a newspaper man. There was no
decision because I think I always knew what I wanted to write.
And I never really thought of writing fiction or writing books or anything of
that sort. It seemed to me that the way to write was to be a newspaper man. My
mother, who was a very well-educated woman, had books in the house all the time,
and I read them. Despite the fact that we were poor, we got a daily paper. And
she used to sit at the table by the light of a kerosene lamp and read it each
evening after all the work was done. And I asked her, at one time, I remember,
if a newspaper carried all the news, printed all the news there was. And she, in
the manner of that day, and because people were not as cynical then as they are
now, said, yes, that's true. And I asked her another question that I thought was
important. I said, is all the news true? Is what the newspaper writes true? And
again, with that lack of cynicism and faith that the people of that time had,
she said, yes, it was. And that decided me to want to be a newspaper man. So
Simak did become a newspaper man, but eventually he found that the type of
writing it required did not completely satisfy him. We asked him why he chose
science fiction when he decided to write fiction. Because when I was a boy, I
had read Jules Verne and I think H.G. Wells, although I don't actually remember
any H.G. Wells works, but I must have read them, Edgar Allan Poe and Haggard.
And I thought what a wonderful thing that was. I just had an awful interest in
the field. I wanted to read it myself, and I found out when I decided that I
wanted to write, when I found out that newspaper didn't give me everything that
I wanted in the writing field, I decided that on part that on my spare time I
write, I naturally seemed to turn to science fiction because it was something I
was acquainted with. I felt very sure that I could do the job in it. And I was
quite fortunate, of course, because there was no competition at that time. If
you could string in three sentences together and make a paragraph, somebody
would buy the story.
Simak's combination of professions is, on the surface, a strange mixture. After
all, newspaper writing requires a lean, straightforward type of prose, whereas
fiction requires much fuller writing. We asked Simak if he thought the styles
required are significantly different. They are absolutely upwards. But I
compartmentalized my life into two lives.
When I went to work in the morning, I was the newspaper man. And when I came
home and sat down at my desk at night, I was a fiction writer. More on Clifford
Simak in our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Science fiction writer Clifford Simak has
been publishing almost continuously every year since 1938. Right, but Simak's
first stories were published several years earlier. Here he explains how his
writing career got started and how it was temporarily stopped. I started my
newspaper career in 1929. And my first short story appeared in, I think, 1931.
And I wrote, at that time, I wrote several other short stories which were
published. And at about that time, the magazine, all magazines, the science
fiction magazines and all others, ran into hard times because the Great
Depression came along. And so there was no market, practically no market. So I
dropped out and didn't do any more writing, any other fiction writing of any
kind, until I think it was 37 or 38. And I started writing again because the
magazines had come back. John Campbell had been named editor of Astounding. And I
felt fairly sure I could sell my work to John Campbell. So I started then again.
And I think since 1938 or 1939, I think it's 37 or 38, there was only one year
in which none of my work appeared. There was one year that's blank. And I can't
remember which year that it was. And I have no idea why that occurred.
So Simak became an early mainstay in John W. Campbell's stable of writers at
Astounding Stories. We asked Simak why he thought his work appealed to Campbell.
I've read a lot of John Campbell's work.
And I knew it. I knew John Campbell was favored
what we today call hard science fiction. And I thought that I could write that
kind of science fiction. I did write what amounted to hard science fiction for
some years and then begin to turn over to the softer science fiction, such most
of which... Well, most people write soft science fiction today. Only a few of
the old hands and maybe a few new beginners write the hard science fiction
today.
During the first few decades he wrote, Simak produced short stories almost
exclusively. We asked him to tell us why he stuck to the short story form. Short
stories is the training ground for the novelist. You can learn a lot more from
writing a short story than you can writing a novel. It's shorter to write,
somewhat easier to write. You don't have the time invested in a short story to
do a novel. If you spend, as a beginner, probably six months or a year writing a
novel, and it fails, why, that's catastrophic. But during that same time, you
could write a half a dozen short stories, and if only one of them sold, why,
okay, you have made a beginning. So it's the path that most people take to
becoming writers or long-going work. And that doesn't apply only to the science
fiction field, but to any literature. More on Clifford Simak on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. Science fiction author Clifford Simak has
written numerous short stories and novels, and he has won several awards in the
field. Perhaps Simak's most famous and enduring work is his City Collection, a
series of eight interconnected stories written in the 1940s. These stories
featured mankind's reaction to a new situation, and man's relationship with an
old friend, the dog, and a new one, the robot. Simak agreed when we call these
stories a leap from his previous efforts. It was a leap. Because I always regard
the City stories as a sort of watershed in my writing. I had been writing the
old type of early type science fiction work up until then. And it seemed to me
that something better could be done than was being done. Strangely enough, at
about the same time, a number of other people seemed to think the same thing.
There's no accounting for something like that happening.
We asked Simak what influenced him to write these revolutionary stories. I think
it was my disillusion
by the war that made me write the City series.
It seemed to me that we were going through a horrible period in history, and
that much of human dignity had been shared away, that it was not the kind of
world that we had lived in up until that time. And I found myself wanting to
retreat from it. So I retreated from it mentally by going into another
dimension, into another world, creating a sort of a fantasy where myself and, as
it turned out, others also were able to find some wreckage. I think if the City
series were written today, that they probably would not get the attention that
they got back in the early 40s. I wrote them, I wrote exactly the right kind of
story at exactly the right time, without knowing I was doing it.
John Campbell published the first seven City stories, but he rejected the
eighth. Here Simak tells us of its fate. The first seven were written fairly
well, one after the other. The eighth and final one, John Campbell turned down,
because he said he thought that he'd written it, that he'd published enough of
the City series. And so when he rejected it, I simply threw it up on the shelf
and figured it was one of my rejects. And then in the winter, I took it down, and I
think I sold it to Amazing Stories. And I don't recall what they called it, but
they put it out with one of their horrible titles.
And then later on, when it came out, it joined the others. But the last one was
not published by Campbell. On our next show, we'll talk about a ninth City
story.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Science fiction writer Clifford Simak's
most famous work is his story collection, City. This collection of eight
connected short stories was first published as a body by Gnome in 1952. Years
afterwards, Simak was persuaded to write a ninth City story, Epilog. Here he
explains its genesis. Well, John Campbell died. And, of course, all of us, all of
us were stricken by his death because he was a comparable young man and appeared
to be in good physical condition.
Some of the writers reverenced him. I'm not too sure I reverenced him, but I
felt very kindly to him and was very badly hit by his death. And a group of the
writers got together and said we'd have to put out a memorial to John Campbell.
And the best way to do it would be to put out the last issue of the old Astounding
story. Not Analog, but the old Astounding story. And so they asked, well, I
suppose there were a dozen or so people who had written for the old Astounding
stories to write a story for the memorial volume. And Harry Harrison, who was the
editor, phoned me and he said, Cliff, if you will write a story, I wish you'd
write another City story.
And I was reluctant to do that. I shied away from it because it had been quite a
number of years since I'd written a City story. And I knew that I was a changed
writer. I was not the same man as I was when I'd written the stories. I worried
a great deal about the propriety of writing another City story because I figured
that the last one, the last of the day, had wound up the story of the Webster
family and that there was no need of going further. But the more I thought about
it, the more I began to see that if I was going to write something for that
memorial volume, it should be a City story. So for the first time, since I'd
written them, I took down my copy of the book City and reread it, trying to
catch the flavor and the spirit of the stories. And when I read the stories, I
simply absolutely ached to rewrite them again because there are some awful
crudities in them. But I knew even as I thought about that, that I couldn't do
it because if I rewrote them, they wouldn't be a City series. So I sat down and
did my best to try to recreate the flavor of the other eight stories. I think I
came very close to it, but not as satisfactorily as I might have wanted to. Ace
published the nine stories as a group for the first time in 1981. The robots in
City are gentle, respectful entities. We asked Simak why he made them so. Most
of the writers who had written robots before wrote of them as machines. And I
wrote of them as surrogate human beings. I made them people with some of the
biases and practices that the living human would have stripped away from them.
And I tried to make them the kind of people that I would want to live with. More
on Clifford Simak on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. Science fiction author Clifford Simak has
been writing for more than 50 years. All his work, especially the well-known
pieces such as City, A Choice of Gods, and Way Station, is characterized by a
warm, sentimental flavor that never cloys. Simak's Midwestern roots and values
are evident in his work, and the reader is caught by their charm. We asked Simak
if he purposely worked his philosophy into his works. The man's philosophy is so
much a part of him that he probably doesn't stop and think about it very often.
He doesn't say, well, this is, I'm writing this way because this is the way I
think or this is the way I feel. When you sit down and write, you're writing the
way you think and you feel unconsciously without, without, uh, trying to work at
it.
not all of Simak's characters are model citizens, but none are ever terribly
evil. We ask Simak why evil plays so small a role in his work. I think I've
never been aware of evil. I have been aware of friendship and love and, um, good
fellowship and honesty, truth. I, uh, get very concerned at times about the
condition of the world, not only now, but in times past. And I know that there
is evil, but it's, I, I kept it at arm's length, not consciously, but, uh,
simply because I didn't want, I guess I didn't want to think about it. I, um, I
concentrated on it, as I said before, on the things that seemed important to me.
Did Simak ever dream, back in his early writing days, that science fiction would
become a fixture in commercial literature? No, not at all. Never for a moment.
We were working in the ghetto. Um, there were very few of us. Uh, science
fiction was read by only a handful. When you met somebody and they
found out you were a science fiction writer, they'd say, how'd you get those
crazy ideas? I, uh, went thinking around hoping nobody would notice you. Um,
you, you were, you were the bottom of the heap, there's no question about it.
You were much more despicable than maybe the pornographic writers of today. Um,
but we kept at it because we liked it. Because I think, I, I think after a few
years of it, I began to feel that probably it would develop and it might have a
future. But I never dreamed that we would be putting out as great, as great and
as good a progress as we have. How does Simak want to be remembered as a writer?
I don't know if I will be remembered. But if I am to be remembered as a writer,
I'd like to be remembered as someone who wrote honestly and who is more
concerned with the heart and mind of humanity than humanity's achievements.
Clifford Simak, a writer whose gentle stories have charmed readers for over 50
years.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.